<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: The Obstinate Refusers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Obstinate Refusers</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Before we parted from these girls we saw two sturdy young men and a woman putting off from the Berkshire shore, and then Dick bethought him of a little banter of the girls, and asked them how it was that there was nobody of the male kind to go with them across the water, and where their boats were gone to. Said one, the youngest of the party: ‚ÄúO, they have got the big punt to lead stone from up the water.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho do you mean by ‚Äòthey,‚Äô dear child?‚Äù said Dick.</p>
			<p>Said an older girl, laughing: ‚ÄúYou had better go and see them. Look there,‚Äù and she pointed northwest, ‚Äúdon‚Äôt you see building going on there?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù said Dick, ‚Äúand I am rather surprised at this time of the year; why are they not haymaking with you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The girls all laughed at this, and before their laugh was over, the Berkshire boat had run on to the grass and the girls stepped in lightly, still sniggering, while the newcomers gave us the sele of the day. But before they were under way again, the tall girl said‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúExcuse us for laughing, dear neighbours, but we have had some friendly bickering with the builders up yonder, and as we have no time to tell you the story, you had better go and ask them; they will be glad to see you‚ÅÝ‚Äîif you don‚Äôt hinder their work.‚Äù</p>
			<p>They all laughed again at that, and waved us a pretty farewell as the punters set them over toward the other shore, and left us standing on the bank beside our boat.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLet us go and see them,‚Äù said Clara; ‚Äúthat is, if you are not in a hurry to get to Streatley, Walter?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO no,‚Äù said Walter, ‚ÄúI shall be glad of the excuse to have a little more of your company.‚Äù</p>
			<p>So we left the boat moored there, and went on up the slow slope of the hill; but I said to Dick on the way, being somewhat mystified: ‚ÄúWhat was all that laughing about? what was the joke?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can guess pretty well,‚Äù said Dick; ‚Äúsome of them up there have got a piece of work which interests them, and they won‚Äôt go to the haymaking, which doesn‚Äôt matter at all, because there are plenty of people to do such easy-hard work as that; only, since haymaking is a regular festival, the neighbours find it amusing to jeer good-humouredly at them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI see,‚Äù said I, ‚Äúmuch as if in Dickens‚Äôs time some young people were so wrapped up in their work that they wouldn‚Äôt keep Christmas.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJust so,‚Äù said Dick, ‚Äúonly these people need not be young either.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut what did you mean by easy-hard work?‚Äù said I.</p>
			<p>Quoth Dick: ‚ÄúDid I say that? I mean work that tries the muscles and hardens them and sends you pleasantly weary to bed, but which isn‚Äôt trying in other ways; doesn‚Äôt harass you in short. Such work is always pleasant if you don‚Äôt overdo it. Only, mind you, good mowing requires some little skill. I‚Äôm a pretty good mower.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This talk brought us up to the house that was a-building, not a large one, which stood at the end of a beautiful orchard surrounded by an old stone wall. ‚ÄúO yes, I see,‚Äù said Dick; ‚ÄúI remember, a beautiful place for a house; but a starveling of a nineteenth century house stood there. I am glad they are rebuilding‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs all stone, too, though it need not have been in this part of the country‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy word, though, they are making a neat job of it; but I wouldn‚Äôt have made it all ashlar.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Walter and Clara were already talking to a tall man clad in his mason‚Äôs blouse, who looked about forty, but was I daresay older, who had his mallet and chisel in hand; there were at work in the shed and on the scaffold about half a dozen men and two women, blouse-clad like the carles, while a very pretty woman who was not in the work but was dressed in an elegant suit of blue linen came sauntering up to us with her knitting in her hand. She welcomed us and said, smiling: ‚ÄúSo you are come up from the water to see the Obstinate Refusers. Where are you going haymaking, neighbours?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, right up above Oxford,‚Äù said Dick; ‚Äúit is rather a late country. But what share have you got with the Refusers, pretty neighbour?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Said she, with a laugh: ‚ÄúO, I am the lucky one who doesn‚Äôt want to work; though sometimes I get it, for I serve as model to Mistress Philippa there when she wants one: she is our head carver; come and see her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She led us up to the door of the unfinished house, where a rather little woman was working with mallet and chisel on the wall near by. She seemed very intent on what she was doing, and did not turn round when we came up; but a taller woman, quite a girl she seemed, who was at work near by, had already knocked off, and was standing looking from Clara to Dick with delighted eyes. None of the others paid much heed to us.</p>
			<p>The blue-clad girl laid her hand on the carver‚Äôs shoulder and said: ‚ÄúNow Philippa, if you gobble up your work like that, you will soon have none to do; and what will become of you then?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The carver turned round hurriedly and showed us the face of a woman of forty (or so she seemed), and said rather pettishly, but in a sweet voice‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt talk nonsense, Kate, and don‚Äôt interrupt me if you can help it.‚Äù She stopped short when she saw us, then went on with the kind smile of welcome which never failed us. ‚ÄúThank you for coming to see us, neighbours; but I am sure that you won‚Äôt think me unkind if I go on with my work, especially when I tell you that I was ill and unable to do anything all through April and May; and this open-air and the sun and the work together, and my feeling well again too, make a mere delight of every hour to me; and excuse me, I must go on.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She fell to work accordingly on a carving in low relief of flowers and figures, but talked on amidst her mallet strokes: ‚ÄúYou see, we all think this the prettiest place for a house up and down these reaches; and the site has been so long encumbered with an unworthy one, that we masons were determined to pay off fate and destiny for once, and build the prettiest house we could compass here‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Here she lapsed into mere carving, but the tall foreman came up and said: ‚ÄúYes, neighbours, that is it; so it is going to be all ashlar because we want to carve a kind of a wreath of flowers and figures all round it; and we have been much hindered by one thing or other‚ÅÝ‚ÄîPhilippa‚Äôs illness amongst others‚ÅÝ‚Äîand though we could have managed our wreath without her‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCould you, though?‚Äù grumbled the last-named from the face of the wall.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, at any rate, she is our best carver, and it would not have been kind to begin the carving without her. So you see,‚Äù said he, looking at Dick and me, ‚Äúwe really couldn‚Äôt go haymaking, could we, neighbours? But you see, we are getting on so fast now with this splendid weather, that I think we may well spare a week or ten days at wheat-harvest; and won‚Äôt we go at that work then! Come down then to the acres that lie north and by west here at our backs and you shall see good harvesters, neighbours.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHurrah, for a good brag!‚Äù called a voice from the scaffold above us; ‚Äúour foreman thinks that an easier job than putting one stone on another!‚Äù</p>
			<p>There was a general laugh at this sally, in which the tall foreman joined; and with that we saw a lad bringing out a little table into the shadow of the stone-shed, which he set down there, and then going back, came out again with the inevitable big wickered flask and tall glasses, whereon the foreman led us up to due seats on blocks of stone, and said‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, neighbours, drink to my brag coming true, or I shall think you don‚Äôt believe me! Up there!‚Äù said he, hailing the scaffold, ‚Äúare you coming down for a glass?‚Äù Three of the workmen came running down the ladder as men with good ‚Äúbuilding legs‚Äù will do; but the others didn‚Äôt answer, except the joker (if he must so be called), who called out without turning round: ‚ÄúExcuse me, neighbours for not getting down. I must get on: my work is not superintending, like the gaffer‚Äôs yonder; but, you fellows, send us up a glass to drink the haymakers‚Äô health.‚Äù Of course, Philippa would not turn away from her beloved work; but the other woman carver came; she turned out to be Philippa‚Äôs daughter, but was a tall strong girl, black-haired and gipsy-like of face and curiously solemn of manner. The rest gathered round us and clinked glasses, and the men on the scaffold turned about and drank to our healths; but the busy little woman by the door would have none of it all, but only shrugged her shoulders when her daughter came up to her and touched her.</p>
			<p>So we shook hands and turned our backs on the Obstinate Refusers, went down the slope to our boat, and before we had gone many steps heard the full tune of tinkling trowels mingle with the humming of the bees and the singing of the larks above the little plain of Basildon.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
